Tutorial draft (#216)
mmtk/mmtk-core: docs/tutorial/Tutorial.md

# MMTk Tutorial

In this tutorial, you will build multiple garbage collectors from 
scratch using MMTk. 
You will start with an incredibly simple 'collector' called NoGC, 
and through a series of additions and refinements end up with a 
generational copying garbage collector. 

This tutorial is aimed at GC implementors who would like to implement 
new GC algorithms/plans with MMTk.

> 

Reviewer: If you are a language implementor interested in *porting* your runtime to MMTk, you should refer to the [porting guide](https://github.com/mmtk/mmtk-core/blob/master/docs/portingguide/Porting_Guide.md) instead.

    * [Basic set up](#basic-set-up)
    * [Test the build](#test-the-build)
    * [Rust Logs](#rust-logs)
    * [Working with multiple VM builds](#working-with-multiple-vm-builds)
  * [Create MyGC](#create-mygc)
* [Building a semispace collector](#building-a-semispace-collector)
  * [What is a semispace collector](#what-is-a-semispace-collector)
  * [Allocation: Add copyspaces](#allocation-add-copyspaces)
  * [Collection: Implement garbage collection](#collection-implement-garbage-collection)
  * [Exercise: Adding another copyspace](#exercise-adding-another-copyspace)
* [Further Reading](#further-reading)

## Introduction
### What *is* MMTk?
The Memory Management Toolkit (MMTk) is a framework for designing and 
implementing memory managers. It has a runtime-neutral core (mmtk-core) 
written in Rust, and bindings that allow it to work with OpenJDK, V8, 
and JikesRVM, with more bindings currently in
development. The principal idea of MMTk is that it can be used as a 
toolkit, allowing new GC algorithms to be rapidly developed using 
common components. It also allows different GC algorithms to be 
compared on an apples-to-apples basis, since they share common mechanisms.

> 

Reviewer: MMTk was originally written in Java as part of the Jikes RVM Java runtime.

### What will this tutorial cover?
This tutorial is intended to get you comfortable constructing new plans in 
MMTk.

> You will first be guided through building a Semispace collector. After that, 

Reviewer: semispace

you will extend this collector to be a generational collector, to further 
familiarise you with different concepts in MMTk. There will also be 
questions and exercises at various points in the tutorial, intended to 
encourage you to think about what the code is doing, increase your general 
understanding of MMTk, and motivate further research.

Where possible, there will be links to finished, functioning code after each 
section so that you can check that your code is correct. Note, however, that 
these will be full collectors. Therefore, there may be some differences between 
these files and your collector due to your position in the tutorial. By the end 
of each major section, your code should be functionally identical to the 
finished code provided.

### Glossary

*allocator*: Code that allocates new objects into memory.

*collector*: Finds and frees memory occupied by 'dead' objects. 

*dead*: An object that is not live.

*GC work (unit), GC packet*: A schedulable unit of collection work. 

> *GC worker*: A worker that performs garbage collection operations (as required 

Reviewer: A worker thread that... (add 'thread')

On the other hand, someone wishing to introduce an entirely new garbage 
collection policy (such as Immix, for example), would need to first create 
a policy which specifies that algorithm, before creating a plan which defines 
how the GC algorithm fits together and utilizes that policy.

[**Back to table of contents**](#contents)
***
## Preliminaries
### Set up MMTk and OpenJDK
#### Basic set up
This tutorial can be completed with any binding. However, for the sake of 
simplicity, only the setup for the OpenJDK binding will be described in detail 
here. If you would like to use another binding, you will need to follow the 
README files in their respective repositories 
([JikesRVM](https://github.com/mmtk/mmtk-jikesrvm), 
[V8](https://github.com/mmtk/mmtk-v8))
 to set them up, and find appropriate benchmarks for testing. 
 Also, while it may be useful to fork the relevant repositories to your own 
 account, it is not required for this tutorial.

First, set up OpenJDK, MMTk, and the binding:
1. Clone the [OpenJDK binding](https://github.com/mmtk/mmtk-openjdk).
2. Clone the mmtk-core repository and the 
[OpenJDK VM repository](https://github.com/mmtk/openjdk). 

> Place them both in `mmtk-openjdk/repos`.

Reviewer: Is this right???   mmtk-core should not be there, it should be in the parent director (ie a sibling, not child, of mmtk-openjdk).   Can someone check this please?

Reviewer 2: You don't need to manually clone OpenJDK. You can just do `git submodule init` and `git submodule update`, which is instructed in the README for mmtk-openjdk. For mmtk-core, it can be put to any path - we just need to point to the path in `Cargo.toml`.

Author: At the moment, this is my file structure:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/75106355/107467565-61925080-6bba-11eb-882e-0dc8c7511cba.png)

So it does work in the configuration I've got it in, but I can change the tutorial if it's not the proper file structure. I was a bit confused about it when I was starting up and haven't really thought about it since then, so I wouldn't be surprised if there was an issue.

itself.
 1. The immortal space is used for objects that the virtual machine or a 
 library never expects to die.
 2. The large object space is needed because MMTk handles particularly large 
 objects differently to normal objects, as the space overhead of copying 
 large objects is very high. Instead, this space is used by a free list 
 allocator in the common plan to avoid having to copy them. 

With this, you should have the allocation working, but not garbage collection. 
Try building MyGC now. If you run HelloWorld or Fannkunchredux, they should 
work. DaCapo's lusearch should fail, as it requires garbage to be collected. 
   
   
   
### Collection: Implement garbage collection

#### CopyContext and Scheduler

We need to add a few more things to get garbage collection working. 
Specifically, we need to add a `CopyContext`, which a GC worker uses for 
copying objects, and GC work packets that will be scheduled for a collection.

At the moment, none of the files in the plan are suited for garbage collection 
operations. So, we need to add a new file to hold the `CopyContext` and other 
structures and functions that will give the collector proper functionality.

> 1. Make a new file under `mygc`, called `gc_works.rs`. 

Reviewer: Systemic:  this should be `gcwork` not `gcworks` (see #232)

Author: Just to confirm - this was the one you said I should ignore for now, since it's a systemic issue?

           self.worker().local(),
       )
       ```
   4. If it is not in the tospace, check if the object is in the fromspace 
   and return the result of the fromspace's `trace_object` if it is.
   5. If it is in neither space, it must be in the immortal space, or large 
   object space. Trace the object with 
   `self.plan().common.trace_object(self, object)`.

   [[Finished code (step 1)]](/docs/tutorial/tutorial%20code/mygc_semispace/gc_works.rs#L73-L95)
2. Add two new implementation blocks, `Deref` and `DerefMut` for 
`MyGCProcessEdges`. These allow `MyGCProcessEdges` to be dereferenced to 
`ProcessEdgesBase`, and allows easy access to fields in `ProcessEdgesBase`.
   ```rust
    impl<VM: VMBinding> Deref for MyGCProcessEdges<VM> {
        type Target = ProcessEdgesBase<Self>;
        #[inline]
        fn deref(&self) -> &Self::Target {
            &self.base
        }
    }

    impl<VM: VMBinding> DerefMut for MyGCProcessEdges<VM> {
        #[inline]
        fn deref_mut(&mut self) -> &mut Self::Target {
            &mut self.base
        }
    }
   ```
    
   [[Finished code (step 2)]](/docs/tutorial/tutorial%20code/mygc_semispace/gc_works.rs#L98-L110)

> #### Release and Finalise

Reviewer: Finalize (technical/international spelling rather than Australian spelling)

Finally, we need to fill out the functions that are, roughly speaking, 
run after each collection.

> 1. To `post_copy()`, in the `CopyContext` implementations block, add 

Reviewer: `post_copy()` is part of **Collection steps**, not **Release and Finalize**

## Contents
* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [Preliminaries](#preliminaries)
  * [Set up MMTK and OpenJDK](#set-up-mmtk-and-openjdk)
    * [Basic set up](#basic-set-up)
    * [Set up benchmarks](#set-up-benchmarks)
    * [Working with multiple VM builds](#working-with-multiple-vm-builds)
  * [Create MyGC](#create-mygc)
* [Building a Semispace Collector](#building-a-semispace-collector)
* [Further Reading](#further-reading)

## Introduction
### What *is* the MMTk?
The Memory Management Toolkit (MMTk) is a framework to design and implement memory managers. It has a core (this repository) written in Rust, and bindings that allow it to work with OpenJDK, V8, and JikesRVM, with more bindings currently in development. The toolkit has a number of pre-built collectors, and is intended to make it relatively simple to expand upon or build new collectors. Many elements common between collectors can be easily implemented.

### What will this tutorial be covering?
This tutorial is intended to get you comfortable with building garbage collectors in the MMTk.

> You will first be guided through building a Semispace collector. After that, you will extend this collector in various ways that are not particularly practical, but introduce different concepts implemented in the MMTk. These exersizes will be less guided, but hints and functional solutions will be available in case you get stuck. There will also be questions at various points in the tutorial, intended to encourage you to think about what the code is *doing* and potentially motivate further research.

Author: Ah, I wrote that when I was thinking of putting more exercises (in the style of the "triplespace" exercise) after the Semispace section rather than going through the GenCopy collector (I don't remember exactly why). I'll fix the wording in the next commit.

          }
         ```
      3. Find the method `get_pages_used`. Replace the current body with `self.tospace().reserved_pages() + self.common.get_pages_used()`, to correctly count the pages contained in the tospace and the common spaces (which will be explained later).

      4. Add a new section of methods for MyGC (outside of the methods for Plan for MyGC).
          ```rust
          impl<VM: VMBinding> MyGC<VM> {
          }
         ```
      5. To this, add two helper methods, `tospace(&self)` and `fromspace(&self)`. They both have return type `&CopySpace<VM>`, and return a reference to the tospace and fromspace respectively. `tospace()` (see below) returns a reference to the tospace, and `fromspace()` returns a reference to the fromspace.
          ```rust
          pub fn tospace(&self) -> &CopySpace<VM> {
            if self.hi.load(Ordering::SeqCst) {
                &self.copyspace1
            } else {
                &self.copyspace0
            }
          }
         ```
      6. Also add the following helper function:
          ```rust
          fn get_collection_reserve(&self) -> usize {
            self.tospace().reserved_pages()
          }
          ``` 

> 1. Find the method `gc_init`. Change this function to initialise the common plan and the two copyspaces, rather than the base plan and mygc_space. The contents of the initializer calls are identical.

Author: This was because I briefly had this section elsewhere, but forgot to fix the numbering after I moved it again

       ```rust
       Self {
             plan: &mmtk.plan,
             mygc: BumpAllocator::new(OpaquePointer::UNINITIALIZED, None, &mmtk.plan),
         }
       ```
   4. In `init`, set the `tls` variable in the held instance of `mygc` to the one passed to the function.
   5. In `prepare`, rebind the allocator to the tospace.
   6. Leave `release` with an empty body.
   7. In `alloc`, call the allocator's `alloc` function. Above the function, use an inline attribute (`#[inline(always)]`) to tell the Rust compiler to always inline the function.
   8. In `post_copy` add the following code. Also, add an inline (always) attribute.
       ```rust
       forwarding_word::clear_forwarding_bits::<VM>(obj);
       ```
5. Add a new public structure, `MyGCProcessEdges`, with the type parameter `<VM:VMBinding>`. It will hold an instance of `ProcessEdgesBase` and `PhantomData`, and implement the Default trait:
    ```rust
    #[derive(Default)]
    pub struct MyGCProcessEdges<VM: VMBinding> {
        base: ProcessEdgesBase<MyGCProcessEdges<VM>>,
        phantom: PhantomData<VM>,
    }
    ```
6. Add a new implementations block `impl<VM:VMBinding> ProcessEdgesWork for MyGCProcessEdges<VM>`.

>    1. Add a VM type alias (`type VM = VM`).

Reviewer 2: `VM` is the associate type for `ProcessEdgesWork`. We set it to `VM` which is the type parameter of `MyGCProcessEdges`.

   2. Add a new method, `new`.
       ```rust
       fn new(edges: Vec<Address>, _roots: bool) -> Self {
           Self {
               base: ProcessEdgesBase::new(edges),
               ..Default::default()
           }
       }
      ```

>    3. Add a new method, `trace_object(&mut self, object: ObjectReference)`.

Reviewer 2: We should show the completed code for this method after all the steps.

>      1. This method should return an ObjectReference, and use the inline (*not* always) attribute.

Reviewer 2: We dont need to emphasis 'not always'. We are not sure the performance difference between `inline` and `inline(always)` here.

     2. Check if the object passed into the function is null (`object.is_null()`). If it is, return the object.
     3. Check if the object is in the tospace (`self.plan().tospace().in_space(object)`). If it is, call `trace_object` through the tospace to check if the object is alive, and return the result:
         ```rust
         self.plan().tospace().trace_object(
               self,
               object,
               super::global::ALLOC_MyGC,
               self.worker().local(),
           )
         ```
     4. If it is not in the tospace, check if the object is in the fromspace and return the result of the fromspace's `trace_object` if it is.
     5. If it is in neither space, it must be in the immortal space, or large object space. Trace the object with `self.plan().common.trace_object(self, object)`.

> 7. Add two new implementation blocks, `Deref` and `DerefMut` for `MyGCProcessEdges`. 

Reviewer 2: This allows dereferencing `MyGCProcessEdges` to `ProcessEdgesBase`, and allows easy access to fields in `ProcessEdgesBase`.

    ```rust
    impl<VM: VMBinding> Deref for MyGCProcessEdges<VM> {
        type Target = ProcessEdgesBase<Self>;
        #[inline]
        fn deref(&self) -> &Self::Target {
            &self.base
        }
    }

    impl<VM: VMBinding> DerefMut for MyGCProcessEdges<VM> {
        #[inline]
        fn deref_mut(&mut self) -> &mut Self::Target {
            &mut self.base
        }
    }
    ```
8. A few import statements need to be added to the other files so that they can use the functions in `gc_works`.
   1. `global.rs`: Import `MyGCCopyContext` and `MyGCProcessEdges`.
   2. `mod.rs`: Import `gc_works` as a module (`mod gc_works;`).
   

> 5. In `global.rs`, delete `handle_user_collection_request`. This function was an override of a Common plan function, which can run correctly when collection is handled.   

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. In `global.rs`, delete `handle_user_collection_request`. This function was an override of a Common plan function to ignore user requested collection for NoGC. Now we remove it and allow user requested collection.   
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I believe we need to add `schedule_collection()` to `MyGC`, like here https://github.com/mmtk/mmtk-core/blob/66dbdce4e3b392c260b9f4601764b53379877eed/src/plan/semispace/global.rs#L93

> ### Adding another copyspace

Reviewer 2: The following seems very rough. I would suggest removing them. We can add the next major section about generational copying later. At least now, we have a complete tutorial for semispace.

Author: I've cleaned the section up, and added my completed code into the backup instructions. It's mainly meant to reinforce the ideas from the semispace section, so I'm not sure whether or not to remove it because I think it does work for that purpose.

Reviewer 2: It looks fine. I thought it was a sketch for the gencopy section.

# MMTk Tutorial

In this tutorial, you will build multiple garbage collectors using MMTk from 
scratch. This tutorial is aimed at GC implementors who would like to implement 

> new GC algorithms/plans using the MMTk.

Reviewer: You will start with an incredibly simple 'collector' called NoGC, and via a series of additions and refinements end up with a generational copying garbage collector.

[the mmtk-core repository](/../master/README.md) and the 
[OpenJDK binding repository](https://github.com/mmtk/mmtk-openjdk/blob/master/README.md).
   * Use the `slowdebug` option when building the OpenJDK binding. This is the 
   fastest debug variant to build, and allows for easier debugging and better 
   testing. The rest of the tutorial will assume you are using `slowdebug`.

#### Test the build
A few benchmarks of varying size will be used throughout the tutorial. If you 
haven't already, set them up now. All of the following commands should be 
entered in `repos/openjdk`.
1. **HelloWorld** (simplest, will never trigger GC): 
   1. Copy the following code into a new Java file titled "HelloWorld.java" 
   in `mmtk-openjdk/repos/openjdk`:
   ```java
   class HelloWorld {
       public static void main(String[] args) {
           System.out.println("Hello World!");
       }
   }
   ```
   2. Use the command 
   `./build/linux-x86_64-normal-server-$DEBUG_LEVEL/jdk/bin/javac HelloWorld.java`.
   3. Then, run 
   `./build/linux-x86_64-normal-server-$DEBUG_LEVEL/jdk/bin/java HelloWorld -XX:+UseThirdPartyHeap` 
   to run HelloWorld.

>    

Reviewer: If your program printed out `Hello World!` as expected, then congratulations, you have MMTk working with OpenJDK.

allocates a small amount of memory but - depending on heap size and the GC 
plan - may not trigger a collection): 
   1. [Copy this code](https://salsa.debian.org/benchmarksgame-team/benchmarksgame/-/blob/master/bencher/programs/fannkuchredux/fannkuchredux.java) 
   into a new file named "fannkuchredux.java" 
   in `mmtk-openjdk/repos/openjdk`.
   2. Use the command 
   `./build/linux-x86_64-normal-server-$DEBUG_LEVEL/jdk/bin/javac fannkuchredux.java`.
   3. Then, run 
   `./build/linux-x86_64-normal-server-$DEBUG_LEVEL/jdk/bin/java fannkuchredux -XX:+UseThirdPartyHeap` 
   to run fannkuchredux.
   
3. **DaCapo** benchmark suite (most complex, will likely trigger multiple 
collections): 
   1. Fetch using 
   `wget https://sourceforge.net/projects/dacapobench/files/9.12-bach-MR1/dacapo-9.12-MR1-bach.jar/download -O ./dacapo-9.12-MR1-bach.jar`.
   2. DaCapo contains a variety of benchmarks, but this tutorial will only be 
   using lusearch. Run the lusearch benchmark using the command 
   `./build/linux-x86_64-normal-server-$DEBUG_LEVEL/jdk/bin/java -XX:+UseThirdPartyHeap -Xms512M -Xmx512M -jar ./dacapo-9.12-MR1-bach.jar lusearch` in `repos/openjdk`. 

> By using one of the debug builds, you gain access to the Rust logs - a useful 

Reviewer: #### Rust Logs

    [2020-12-18T00:27:49Z INFO  mmtk::plan::global]   [POLL] nogc_space: Triggering collection
    [2020-12-18T00:27:49Z INFO  mmtk::plan::global]   [POLL] nogc_space: Triggering collection
    [2020-12-18T00:27:49Z INFO  mmtk::plan::global]   [POLL] nogc_space: Triggering collection
    [2020-12-18T00:27:49Z INFO  mmtk::plan::global]   [POLL] nogc_space: Triggering collection
    [2020-12-18T00:27:49Z INFO  mmtk::plan::global]   [POLL] nogc_space: Triggering collection
    [2020-12-18T00:27:49Z INFO  mmtk::plan::global]   [POLL] nogc_space: Triggering collection
    [2020-12-18T00:27:49Z INFO  mmtk::plan::global]   [POLL] nogc_space: Triggering collection
    [2020-12-18T00:27:49Z INFO  mmtk::plan::global]   [POLL] nogc_space: Triggering collection
    [2020-12-18T00:27:49Z INFO  mmtk::plan::global]   [POLL] nogc_space: Triggering collection
    fatal runtime error: failed to initiate panic, error 5
    Aborted (core dumped)
    ```
4. If you haven't already, try building using Semispace. lusearch should now 
pass, as garbage will be collected, and the smaller benchmarks should run the 
same as they did while using NoGC.

### Create MyGC

> NoGC is a GC plan that only allocates memory, and does not have a collector. 

Reviewer: Recall that this tutorial will take you through the steps of building a collector from first principles.    To do that you'll create your own plan called `MyGC` which you'll gradually refine and improve through the course of this tutorial.  At the beginning MyGC will resemble the very simple NoGC plan.

        ```
        This adds `mygc` as a module, which can be conditionally compiled 
        using the feature (or environment variable) `mygc`. A GC plan needs 
        to be selected at build time, and only one plan can be selected 
        (as `selected_plan`).
    3. `mmtk-openjdk/mmtk/Cargo.toml`, under `[features]`, add: 
        ```rust 
        mygc = ["mmtk/mygc"] 
        ```
        This adds the build flag to the binding crate, using the `mygc` 
        flag from mmtk-core.
    
Note that all of the above changes almost exactly copy the NoGC entries in 
each of these files. However, NoGC has some variants, such as a lock-free 
variant, that are not needed for this tutorial. Remove references to them in 
the MyGC plan now. 
1. Within `mygc/global.rs`, find any use of `#[cfg(feature = "mygc_lock_free")]` 
and delete both it *and the line below it*.
2. Then, delete any use of the above line's negation, 
`#[cfg(not(feature = "mygc_lock_free"))]`, this time without changing the 
line below it.

After you rebuild OpenJDK (and the MMTk core), you can use MyGC. Try testing it 
with the each of the three benchmarks. It should work identically to NoGC.

> 

Reviewer: If you've got to this point, congratulations, you have create your first working MMTk collector!

haven't already. Try answering the following questions by looking at the code 
and [Further Reading](#further-reading): 
   * Where is the allocator defined?
   * How many memory spaces are there?
   * What kind of memory space policy is used?
   * What happens if garbage has to be collected?   

[**Back to table of contents**](#contents)

***
## Building a Semispace Collector
### What is a Semispace collector?
In a Semispace collector, the heap is divided into two equally-sized spaces, 
called 'semispaces'. One of these is defined as a 'fromspace', and the other 
a 'tospace'. The allocator allocates to the tospace until it is full. 

When the tospace is full, a stop-the-world GC is triggered. The mutator is 
paused, and the definitions of the spaces are flipped (the 'tospace' becomes 
a 'fromspace', and vise versa). Then, the collector scans each object in what 
is now the fromspace. If a live object is found, a copy of it is made in the 
tospace. That is to say, live objects are copied *from* the fromspace *to* 
the tospace. After every object is scanned, the fromspace is cleared. The GC 
finishes, and the mutator is resumed.

### Allocation: Add copyspaces

> The first step of changing the MyGC plan into a Semispace plan is to add the 

Reviewer: ~changing the MyGC plan into a Semispace plan~ changing your MyGC plan from one that cannot collect garbage into one that implements the semispace algorithm
